---
layout: post
title: ELBO — What & Why
---

## :rocket: Quick Facts<a name="quick_facts"></a>

The ELBO (evidence lower bound) is a key quantity in [Variational Bayesian Methods](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variational_Bayesian_methods). It transforms inference problems, which are always _intractable_, into optimization problems that can be solved with, for example, gradient-based methods.

## Introduction

In this post, I'll introduce an important concept in  [Variational Bayesian (VB) Methods](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variational_Bayesian_methods) — ELBO (evidence lower bound, also known as variational lower bound) — and its derivations, alongside with some digging into it. ELBO enables the rewriting of statistical inference problems as optimization problems, the so-called _inference-optimization duality_ (see [Eric Jang's blog](https://blog.evjang.com/2016/08/variational-bayes.html)). Combined with optimization methods such as gradient descent and modern approximation techniques, e.g., deep neural networks, inference on complex distributions can be achieved. Numerous applications can be found in [VAE](https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114v10), [DVRL](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.02426), [MERLIN](https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.10760), to name a few.

## Table of Contents

* Motivation
* Derivation: From a View of KL Divergence
* Derivation: From a View of Observations
* Insights
* Summaries

## Motivation

Statistical inference problems focus on infer the value of one random variable given the value of another random variable. Given the observation, $x$, we are interested in finding the _posterior_ distribution of the latent variable $z$ (we call it "latent" as it is not observed), $p(z|x)$. However, this is generally _intractable_ as when we express it using [Bayes' theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayes%27_theorem), the computation of the marginal distribution of observation at the denominator requires the integration (or summation) over the whole latent space:

$$
\begin{align}
p(z|x)=\frac{p(z)p(z|x)}{p(x)}=\frac{p(z)p(z|x)}{\int_z p(x,z) dz}.
\tag{1}
\end{align}
$$

A natural question would be that "Can we use another distribution, let's say $q(z)$, as an approximation of the true _posterior_ distribution?" The answer is "Yes" and I shall explain in the next section.

## Derivation: From a View of KL Divergence

Consider the problem that using a distribution $q_\theta(z)$ parameterized by $\theta$ to approximate the true _posterior_ distribution $p(z|x)$, the first issue we need to address is to select a suitable criterion to measure how close is $q_\theta(z)$ to $p(z|x)$. [Kullback–Leibler divergence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kullback%E2%80%93Leibler_divergence) is such a metric. Specifically, we use reverse KL divergence here (see [Eric Jang's blog](https://blog.evjang.com/2016/08/variational-bayes.html)) for more insights into forward KL and reverse KL). 

The KL divergence between $Q_\theta(Z)$ and $P(Z|X)$ is

$$
\begin{align}
KL\left(Q(Z)||P(Z|X)\right) &= \int_z q(z) \log \frac{q(z)}{p(z|x)} dz\\
&= -\int_z q(z) \log \frac{p(z|x)}{q(z)} dz\\
&= -\int_z q(z) \log \frac{p(z,x)}{q(z)p(x)} dz \\
&= - \left( \int_z q(z) \log \frac{p(z,x)}{q(z)} dz - \int_z q(z) \log p(x) dz\right) \\
&= - \int_z q(z) \log \frac{p(z,x)}{q(z)} dz + \log p(x) \\ 
&= \int_z q(z) \log \frac{q(z)}{p(z,x)} dz + \log p(x).
\tag{2}
\end{align}
$$

To minimize the KL divergence _w.r.t._ parameters $\theta$ we need to minimize the term $\int_z q(z) \log \frac{q(z)}{p(z,x)} dz$. It leads to maximize its negation $\mathcal{L} = -\int_z q(z) \log \frac{q(z)}{p(z,x)} dz$, which is known as the _evidence lower bound_ (ELBO). We will find some intuitive explanations about its name by plugging $\mathcal{L}$ into Eq. (2):

$$
\begin{align}
\log p(x) = \mathcal{L} + KL\left(Q(Z)||P(Z|X)\right)
\tag{3}
\end{align}
$$

By definition, the term "_evidence_" is the value of a likelihood function evaluated with fixed parameters. Note that the KL divergence at the right-hand side of Eq. (3) is non-negative, the term $\log p(x)$ is greater or equal to $\mathcal{L}$. And hence $\mathcal{L}$ sets a lower bound for evidence.

## Derivation: From a View of Observations

If we start the derivation from the marginal distribution of observations,

$$
\begin{align}
\log p(x) &= \log \int_z p(x, z) dz \\
&= \log \int_z p(x, z) \frac{q(z)}{q(z)} dz \\
&= \log \mathbb{E}_{z \sim Q(Z)} \left[ \frac{p(x, z)}{q(z)}\right] \\
&\geq \mathbb{E}_Q \left[ \log \frac{p(x,z)}{q(z)}\right] \text{by Jensen's inequality} \\
&= \mathbb{E}_Q \left[ \log p(x,z) \right] + \int_z q(z) \log \frac{1}{q(z)} dz \\
&= \mathbb{E}_Q \left[ \log p(x,z) \right] + H(Z)
\tag{4},
\end{align}
$$

where $H(Z)$ is the Shannon entropy. It is straightforward to show that the right hand of Eq. (4) is the same as $\mathcal{L}$, one expression of ELBO we derived in the previous section. It is also obvious that the term $\mathbb{E}_Q \left[ \log p(x,z) \right] + H(Z)$ is a lower bound for the log-marginal probability of observations, which means that we just need to maximize ELBO when we wish to maximize the marginal probability of observations.

## Insights

First of all, let's derive further from Eq. (4):

$$
\begin{align}
\mathcal{L} &= \mathbb{E}_Q \left[ \log p(x,z) \right] + H(Z) \\
&= \int_z q(z) \log \left(p(x|z)p(z)\right)dz + \int_z q(z) \log \frac{1}{q(z)} dz\\
&= \int_z q(z) \log p(x|z) dz + \int_z q(z) \log p(z) dz + \int_z q(z) \log \frac{1}{q(z)} dz\\
&= \mathbb{E}_Q \left[ \log p(x|z)\right] - \int_z q(z) \log \left(\frac{q(z)}{p(z)}\right) dz \\
&= \mathbb{E}_Q \left[ \log p(x|z)\right] - KL\left(Q(Z)||P(Z)\right).
\tag{5}
\end{align}
$$

Eq. (5) shows that the ELBO has two terms, one expected log-likelihood term and one KL divergence term. It suggests that the ELBO is a trade-off between the reconstruction accuracy, $\mathbb{E}_Q \left[ \log p(x|z)\right]$, against the complexity of the _posterior_ approximation, $KL\left(Q||P\right)$. The KL divergence term can be interpreted as a measure of the additional information required to express the _posterior_ relative to the _prior_. As it approaches zero, the _posterior_ is fully obtainable from the _prior_.

Furthermore, let's think about the reason behind the reverse KL divergence we used to derive Eq. (2).

$$
\begin{align}
KL\left(Q(Z)||P(Z|X)\right) = \int_z q(z) \log \frac{q(z)}{p(z|x)} dz
\tag{6}
\end{align}
$$

It turns out that the variational distribution $Q(Z)$ is prevented from spanning the whole space. Consider the case where the denominator in Eq. (6) is zero, the value of $q(z)$ has to be zero as well otherwise the KL divergence goes to infinity. In summary, the reverse KL divergence has the effect of zero-forcing as minimizing it leads to $Q$ being squeezed under $P$ (see [Eric Jang's blog](https://blog.evjang.com/2016/08/variational-bayes.html)).

## Summaries

In this post, we begin with the concept of variational inference, then derive the ELBO from several points of view, and finally dig deeper facts behind the ELBO. As I mentioned in the section [:rocket: Quick Facts](#quick_facts), it plays an important role because it provides a framework in which the statistical inference can be transformed into optimization, leading to more and more amazing applications in the deep learning community.

Thanks for your interest and reading! 
